---
title: Methods
nav:
  order: 2
  tooltip: Approach, Methods, and Materials
---

{% include section.html %}

# Approach
To screen for SDL interactions, the Rothstein group developed Selective Ploidy Ablation (SPA, Fig. 4) {% include superscript.html text='[7](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.109033.110)'%}. SPA involves a universal donor strain consisting of an over-expression plasmid and 16 modified chromosomes {% include superscript.html text='[8](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.087999)'%} destined for destabilization in diploid cells. After mating this donor strain with a library consisting of either single nonessential gene mutants or temperature sensitive alleles of essential genes, all of the chromosomes of the donor genome are selected against leaving only the over-expression plasmid and the recipient genome consisting of a single mutation ([Fig. 1A](../#backgroundmotivation)). Mating and media transferring protocols are assisted via robotic pinning and growth of the recipient strains is measured through quantitating digital images of colony growth ([Fig. 1B](../#backgroundmotivation)). The ScreenMill R package allows the quantification of colony sizes by utilizing image-analyzing algorithms, colony-size normalization, and manual input. After the review process, ScreenMill reports screen results and relevant statistical information {% include superscript.html text='[9](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-353)'%}. The coupling of SPA, ScreenMill, and the expression of SARS-CoV-2 proteins allows us to screen for SDL interactions. Strains of mutants that show an SDL interaction will be designated as hits and those will be explored further to determine the pathway and mechanism of action caused by viral proteins. The Rothstein laboratory is collaborating with virologist [Vincent Racaniello’s](https://microbiology.columbia.edu/faculty-vincent-racaniello) group, which will verify SPA-discovered yeast pathways in mammalian cell lines using homologous genes.  

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/figure-4.png"
  bold_caption="Figure 4. SDL interaction screens using SPA."
  caption="A. Mating of donor (black chromosomes) strain with recipient (white chromosomes) strain and subsequent donor chromosome destabilization. B. Plasmid transfer is selected using high-throughput robot pinning of 384 mutants per plate in quadruplicate with each overexpressing gene Y. C. Bottom magnification (over-expression of gene Y) shows an SDL for gene B as there is less growth compared to top magnification (normal expression of gene Y)."
  width="400px"
%}

{% include section.html %}
# Methods and Materials
_Note: This section is modified from a methods paper written by [Reid et. al](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.116.190231)._
<br> <br>**Yeast strains and methods** <br>
Yeast gene disruption strain libraries in the BY4741 or BY4742 strain backgrounds for high throughput SDL screens were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA){% include superscript.html text='[21](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.285.5429.901)'%}. The yeast library of temperature-sensitive alleles for essential genes in the BY4741 background was a kind gift of Brenda Andrews (University of Toronto). Standard yeast growth media and culture techniques were used throughout this work{% include superscript.html text='[22](https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/9413810)'%}. Selective ploidy ablation (SPA) was used for high throughput transfer of expression plasmids into yeast strain libraries for SDL screens as previously described{% include superscript.html text='[23](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.109033.110)'%}. Colony growth was measured from scanned plate images using ScreenMill software as previously described{% include superscript.html text='[24](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-353)'%}. Colony growth data processed via ScreenMill is provided [here](../genetic%20interactions/#-genetic-interactions-determined-by-spa-screens). Plates were manually reviewed to exclude regions of pinning failure, then colony measurements were normalized to the plate median. Replica pinning for the SPA procedure was accomplished using a Singer RoToR HDA robot (Singer Instruments, Somerset, UK). G418 and clonNAT were purchased from MediaTech and Werner Bioagents, respectively. LiOAc transformations were performed as described{% include superscript.html text='[25](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00340712)'%}.

<br>**Plasmid construction** <br>
All plasmids were constructed using standard cloning techniques. The single and double gene expression empty vectors (pWJ1781, pWJ2216) was constructed as described in a previous paper by this group{% include superscript.html text='[26](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.116.190231)'%}. To construct the galactose-inducible nsp14 expression plasmid (pWJ2759) the nsp14 open reading frame (ORF) was PCR amplified from a plasmid library of SARS-CoV-2 genes gifted by David Ho (Columbia University) using primers nsp14-F1 (5′-GAATTCCAGCTGACCACCATGGCTGAAAATGTAACAGGACTTT-3′) and nsp14-R1 (5′-GATCCCCGGGAATTGCCATGT- CATTACTGAAGTCTTGTAAAAGTGTTC-3′). Purified DNA was recombined in yeast with pWJ1781 plasmid DNA linearized by HpaI restriction digestion. Overexpression vectors containing nsp14 exonuclease (D90A/E92A) and methyltransferase (D331A) mutants (pWJ2996, pWJ2997) were constructed via overlap PCR as described{% include superscript.html text='[27](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mex.2019.12.001)'%} with primers found from [Supplemental Table 1](#supplemental-material). The dual expression vector of nsp10 and nsp14 (pWJ3008, pWJ3009, pWJ3010 for the ExoN and MT mutants) were constructed using the nsp10 ORF cloned from the David Ho plasmid library with primers nsp10-F (5′-GAATTCCAGCTGACCACCATGGCTGGTAATGCAACAGAAGTG-3′) and nsp10-R (5′-GATCCCCGGGAATTGCCATGTCA- TTACTGAAGCATGGGTTCGCGG-3′). All plasmid constructs were verified by sequencing (GENEWIZ, South Plainfield, NJ).

<br>**Landscape enrichment analysis and statistics** <br>
Landscape enrichment analysis was performed using genetic interaction profile correlations from The Cell Map{% include superscript.html text='[28](https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.117.040220),'%}{% include superscript.html text='[29](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf1420)'%}. The details regarding data exclusion, generation of t-SNE plots, and statistical calculations are as previous described{% include superscript.html text='[30](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz631)'%}. <i>MATα</i> and <i>MAT</i><b>a</b> gene disruption SDL hits and suppressor hits were defined by a calculated Z-score ≤−2 and ≥1.5, respectively.

<br>**Colony growth and fitness measurements** <br>
Overnight liquid cultures were grown to saturation in appropriate selective media. Saturated cultures were equilibrated to an OD600 of 1.0, arrayed in a 96-well microtiter plate, and pinned four times at 384 colony density giving 4 technical replicates using a Singer RoToR robot. Strains were grown on synthetic complete (SC) solid agar media with 2% galactose for induction and appropriate nutrient dropout to maintain plasmid selection. Plates containing the pinned colonies were incubated at 30C for 65h. For growth curves, colonies were scanned hourly. Colony density was measured using Screenmill{% include superscript.html text='[24](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-11-353)'%} and plotted using R with in-house scripts found [here](../genetic%20interactions/#code).

{% include section.html %}
# Supplemental Material
Supplemental Table S1: [S1.csv](https://meganwang08.github.io//SARS-CoV-2-Genetic-Interactions-in-Yeast/methods/S1.csv)
